Create guide for aws redshift components (#348)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/airflow-redshift.md

---

> title: "Orchestrate Redshift Operations from Airflow"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Orchestrating Redshift Operations from Airflow"
```

I left some comments in this throughout, but I think for the content to match this title we should give some context on the "orchestration" piece. Only has to be a few sentences throughout, but more on the when/why/use cases/etc.

> description: "Everything you need to know about setting up a connection to Redshift and using available Redshift components."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Setting up a connection to Redshift and using available Redshift modules."
```

Updates "components" to "modules" since that's the language we use in the Registry for operators/sensors/etc.

date: 2022-03-21T00:00:00.000Z
slug: "airflow-redshift"
tags: ["Database", "SQL", "DAGs", "Integrations", "AWS"]
---

> 

Author: Added an Overview section. Basically stole the one you linked for Sagemaker and reworded it for Redshift.

>Note: All code in this guide can be found [in this GitHub repo](https://github.com/astronomer/cs-tutorial-redshift). 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setup

To use any Redshift operators in Airflow, you will first need to install the provider package and create a connection to your Redshift cluster.
```
You may want to edit the text I'm suggesting here, but let's add the higher level Setup section header for readability. For context, the "##" level section headers are what get pulled for the Contents links in the guides.

Author: Great suggestion! I'll go ahead and commit it and we can come back to the wording.

### Install Required pip Dependency

> Before you can use all the Airflow components for Redshift, you will need to ensure that you have the Amazon 
> Provider installed on your Airflow deployment. To do this, simply add `apache-airflow-providers-amazon` to your 
> `requirements.txt` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can use all the Airflow components for Redshift, you will need to ensure that you have the Amazon 
Provider installed on your Airflow deployment. If you are working with the Astro CLI, simply add `apache-airflow-providers-amazon` to your 
`requirements.txt` file.
```

### Add Required Connections

> Assuming you have a local sandbox running to develop Redshift pipelines, you'll need to add a connection in the Airflow 

Reviewer: By "local sandbox" do you mean for Airflow? You would still need to set up the connection even if using Airflow from Astro or some other Airflow instance, yeah? 

Probably worth being explicit here about all of the different scenarios. Something like "You will need to setup your Airflow instance so it can connect to Redshift. You can do this using an Airflow connection, as follows.... Or, if your Airflow instance is running in the same AWS environment as your Redshift cluster, you may be able to use assumed roles...." (I'm not entirely sure how that last bit works, but you get the idea. I think we have some relevant docs here we could link to as well).

Author: Added to the next commit.

  blank):
  
  ```yaml
  Connection ID: aws_default
  Connection Type: Amazon Web Services
  Extra: {
    "aws_access_key_id": "<your-access-key-id>", 
    "aws_secret_access_key": "<your-secret-access-key>", 
    "region_name": "<your-region-name>"
  }
  ```

**Additional Notes:**

- To authenticate to Redshift using IAM Authentication or Okta Identity Provider, see 
  [this doc](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-amazon/stable/connections/redshift.html) 
  for instructions
- Ensure that your Redshift Cluster allows inbound traffic from the IP Address where Airflow is running
- The `aws_default` connection will need the following permissions on AWS:
    - Access to perform read/write actions for a pre-configured S3 Bucket
    - Access to interact with the Redshift Cluster, specifically: 
        - `redshift:DescribeClusters`
        - `redshift:PauseCluster`
        - `redshift:ResumeCluster`

### Underlying Data

It is worth noting that these examples will be using the Sample database (TICKIT) provided by AWS. For more details 
on the underlying data, please see Amazon's documentation [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/c_sampledb.html).

> ### Using the RedshiftSQLOperator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the RedshiftSQLOperator
```

Author: Added to next commit.

With an established connection to Redshift, it's time to explore the 
[RedshiftSQLOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/amazon/modules/redshiftsqloperator)! The 

> RedshiftSQLOperator is used to run one or multiple SQL statements against a Redshift Cluster. The below example shows 

Reviewer: Can we add a sentence or two here describing _when_ you might want to run SQL queries in Redshift? I think putting it in the context of one or more example use cases might be helpful.

Author: Added to next commit.

  date_key date,
  total_sellers int,
  total_events int,
  total_tickets int,
  total_revenue double precision
) sortkey(date_key)
;

delete from {{ params.schema }}.{{ params.table }} where date_key = '{{ ds }}';

insert into {{ params.schema }}.{{ params.table }}
  select
    listtime::date as date_key,
    count(distinct sellerid) as total_sellers,
    count(distinct eventid) as total_events,
    sum(numtickets) as total_tickets,
    sum(totalprice) as total_revenue
  from tickit.listing
  where listtime::date = '{{ ds }}'
  group by date_key
;
end;
```

Looking at the SQL, you may be wondering what `{{ params.schema }}`, `{{ params.table }}`, and `{{ ds }}` are. Based on 
the task definition, `{{ params.schema }}` was set as *fct* and `{{ params.table }}` was set as *listing*. So 
those values will be injected into the SQL at runtime. The `{{ ds }}` variable is a built-in [Airflow Jinja Template 
Variable](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/templates-ref.html) that will return the DAG run's 
logical date as *YYYY-MM-DD*. Using these variables will make your SQL code reusable and on par with DAG writing best
practices (particularly around the concept of 

> [idempotency](https://airflow-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/airflow-intro.html#idempotency)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[idempotency](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dag-best-practices#reviewing-idempotency)).
```

Shameless self promotion here - if we can let's link to our other guides instead of Airflow docs.

Author: Added in the next commit.

> ### Using the S3ToRedshiftOperator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the S3ToRedshiftOperator
```

Author: Added to next commit.

    end_date=datetime(2008, 1, 7),
    max_active_runs=1,
    template_searchpath='/usr/local/airflow/include/example_dag_redshift',
    catchup=True
) as dag:

    s3_to_redshift = S3ToRedshiftOperator(
        task_id='s3_to_redshift',
        schema='fct',
        table='from_redshift',
        s3_bucket='airflow-redshift-demo',
        s3_key='fct/from_redshift',
        redshift_conn_id='redshift_default',
        aws_conn_id='aws_default',
        copy_options=[
            "DELIMITER AS ','"
        ],
        method='REPLACE'
    )
```

The result of this would be to copy the s3 blob `s3://airflow-redshift-demo/fct/from_redshift` into the table 
`fct.from_redshift` on the Redshift cluster. With this operator, you can pass all the same copy options that exist in
AWS. This includes Data format parameters, Data conversion parameters, Data load operations, etc. Read AWS's official 
documentation for the `COPY` commmand 
[here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/r_COPY.html#r_COPY-syntax-overview-data-format). In this example, 
the delimiter for the blob has been specified as a comma (this overrides the default of a pipe delimiter). 

> ### Using the RedshiftToS3Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the RedshiftToS3Operator
```

Author: Added to next commit.

The [RedshiftToS3Operator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/amazon/modules/redshifttos3operator) executes an 

> `UNLOAD` command to s3 as a CSV with headers.

Reviewer: Same comment here - can we add a "This may be useful when...." type of sentence or two at the end of this first paragraph?

        s3_bucket='airflow-redshift-demo',
        s3_key='fct/listing/{{ ds }}_',
        schema='fct',
        table='listing',
        redshift_conn_id='redshift_default',
        aws_conn_id='aws_default',
        table_as_file_name=False,
        unload_options=[
            "DELIMITER AS ','",
            "FORMAT AS CSV",
            "ALLOWOVERWRITE",
            "PARALLEL OFF",
            "HEADER"
        ]
    )
```

The result of this would be to copy the `fct.listing` table from a Redshift cluster to the following s3 blob 
`s3:://airflow-redshift-demo/fct/listing/YYYY-MM-DD_` (where YYYY-MM-DD is the logical date for the DAG run). With this
operator, you can pass all the same unload options that exist in AWS. Read AWS's official documentation for the `UNLOAD` 
command [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/r_UNLOAD.html). In this example, the delimiter for the 
blob has been specified as a comma, the format of the blob has been specified as a csv, any existing files will be 
overwritten, data will *not* be written in parallel across multiple files, and  a header line containing column names 
will be included at the top of the file.

> ### Pause and Resume a Redshift Cluster from Airflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pause and Resume a Redshift Cluster from Airflow
```

Author: Added to next commit.

Amazon Redshift supports the ability to pause and resume a cluster, 

> allowing customer to easily suspend on-demand billing while the cluster is not being used. For example, a cluster used 

Reviewer: Can we add a sentence or two on why you would want your Airflow DAG to do this pausing/unpausing?

Author: Added to the next commit.

from airflow.providers.amazon.aws.operators.redshift_cluster import RedshiftResumeClusterOperator
from airflow.providers.amazon.aws.sensors.redshift_cluster import RedshiftClusterSensor

with DAG(
    dag_id=f"example_dag_redshift",
    schedule_interval="@daily",
    start_date=datetime(2008, 1, 1),
    end_date=datetime(2008, 1, 7),
    max_active_runs=1,
    template_searchpath='/usr/local/airflow/include/example_dag_redshift',
    catchup=True
) as dag:
  
    pause_redshift = RedshiftPauseClusterOperator(
        task_id='pause_redshift',
        cluster_identifier='astronomer-success-redshift',
        aws_conn_id='aws_default'
    )
    
    resume_redshift = RedshiftResumeClusterOperator(
      task_id='resume_redshift',
      cluster_identifier='astronomer-success-redshift',
      aws_conn_id='aws_default'
    )

    cluster_sensor = RedshiftClusterSensor(
        task_id='wait_for_cluster',
        cluster_identifier='astronomer-success-redshift',
        target_status='available',
        aws_conn_id='aws_default'
    )

    pause_redshift >> resume_redshift >> cluster_sensor

> ```

Reviewer: From a quick glance at the registry, it seems like you're covering all of the Redshift-related operators/sensors, but if there are any others you don't talk about in depth here, it may be worth mentioning them briefly and linking out to the registry. We do this in the SageMaker guide if you need an example.

It also seems like some of the Redshift operators are "duplicated". Like I see a AwsRedshiftClusterSensor and a RedshiftClusterSensor that appear (?) to do the same thing. Not sure what you think about mentioning stuff like that in case one or the other is up to date/people should avoid one?

Author: Yeah, I went through each of the modules. Anything that is deprecated, I excluded from this guide. Everything else should be included.

`COPY` command to load files from s3 to Redshift. The example below demonstrates how to use this Operator:

```python
from datetime import datetime
from airflow.models import DAG
from airflow.providers.amazon.aws.transfers.s3_to_redshift import S3ToRedshiftOperator

from datetime import datetime
with DAG(
    dag_id=f"example_dag_redshift",
    schedule_interval="@daily",
    start_date=datetime(2008, 1, 1),
    end_date=datetime(2008, 1, 7),
    max_active_runs=1,
    template_searchpath='/usr/local/airflow/include/example_dag_redshift',
    catchup=True
) as dag:

    s3_to_redshift = S3ToRedshiftOperator(
        task_id='s3_to_redshift',
        schema='fct',
        table='from_redshift',
        s3_bucket='airflow-redshift-demo',
        s3_key='fct/from_redshift',
        redshift_conn_id='redshift_default',
        aws_conn_id='aws_default',
        copy_options=[
            "DELIMITER AS ','"
        ],
        method='REPLACE'
    )
```

The result of this would be to copy the s3 blob `s3://airflow-redshift-demo/fct/from_redshift` into the table 
`fct.from_redshift` on the Redshift cluster. With this operator, you can pass all the same copy options that exist in

> AWS. This includes Data format parameters, Data conversion parameters, Data load operations, etc. Read AWS's official 

Reviewer: Can we add a little detail here about which parameters are which? e.g. for "Data conversion parameters", what does that map to in terms of operator parameters, and when would people want to think about those? I think being a little more prescriptive here for anybody who's new to Redshift would be helpful.

Author: Done.

        s3_bucket='airflow-redshift-demo',
        s3_key='fct/listing/{{ ds }}_',
        schema='fct',
        table='listing',
        redshift_conn_id='redshift_default',
        aws_conn_id='aws_default',
        table_as_file_name=False,
        unload_options=[
            "DELIMITER AS ','",
            "FORMAT AS CSV",
            "ALLOWOVERWRITE",
            "PARALLEL OFF",
            "HEADER"
        ]
    )
```

The result of this would be to copy the `fct.listing` table from a Redshift cluster to the following s3 blob 
`s3:://airflow-redshift-demo/fct/listing/YYYY-MM-DD_` (where YYYY-MM-DD is the logical date for the DAG run). With this
operator, you can pass all the same unload options that exist in AWS. Read AWS's official documentation for the `UNLOAD` 
command [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/r_UNLOAD.html). In this example, the delimiter for the 
blob has been specified as a comma, the format of the blob has been specified as a csv, any existing files will be 
overwritten, data will *not* be written in parallel across multiple files, and  a header line containing column names 
will be included at the top of the file.

> ## Pause and Resume a Redshift Cluster from Airflow

Reviewer: It may be helpful for this section to put these operators in the context of a DAG with other Redshift operators. I'm assuming that if you were to implement pausing/unpausing in Airflow, the benefit to doing so would be that you can do so programmatically based on other factors. e.g. I can unpause my Redshift cluster, then have a sensor wait for it to come up, then run a Redshift query, then pause the cluster. Does that make sense as a use case?

Author: I went ahead and added this per your recommendation.
